Well, it's a great mistake because my publisher said to me, Bob Gottlieb said to me, Bill, every one of your books is different and that's the problem.
The mercurial is mine.
If I could pick the substance that most fascinates me and which is most like me, it's quicksilver.
And with that, it's all over the place.
These things bond according to their own life, according to their own energy.
I'm trying to be faithful to the energy that's appearing today.
I saw a little new piece about a Russian woodcutter
who found a mastodon in a block of ice.
And I thought, and then the energy in that was tremendous.
So that's what you write.
You write what's given to you.
You've written for children as well.
Tell me about, and I respect that, by the way.
I love children in these books.
And you don't mind if we jump around the block on things.
Tell me a little bit about...
Do you consciously sit down and write a book for kids and then turn off that tap and do the other tap?
It comes calling.
I saw on Gumbel's show in the morning, one morning, an interview with Texas millionaires who had the first teddy bear.
They kept this teddy bear in a safe because it was worth a million dollars.
I thought, the poor teddy bear.
Man, he's locked in this safe.
I want to liberate the teddy bear.
So I wrote The Million Dollar Bear, which is coming out next year, and it's The Liberation of the Teddy Bear.
And that one came to me in the only form it could be, a children's book.
I mean, of course, we could have a couple of gangsters liberate the teddy bear.
Maybe I'll do that next.
But for this, I wanted kids.
I remembered my teddy bear, and no child would put his teddy bear in a safe, only a couple of them.
Texas millionaires.
This is investment.
Yeah.
Right.
Buying for value.
Yes.
And to extend this further, I would like to give kids the magic of their lives instead of the madness of their lives.
And in that, in such ideas as liberating a teddy bear, I think they find the magic of their lives.
There's some things I'd like to give to kids to get them out of the groove that they're being poured into.
You know, Salvador Dali was at war with his father because his father wanted him to be a straight and narrow citizen.
He used to shit in the family drawers and hide turds in the drawers just to break his father's will because he didn't want to be changed.
He knew that we were born with the gift of great perception and that it's stolen from us.
It's assembled everywhere.
And it's reassembled into the ordinary.
And he refused, and he called it paranoia.
His paranoia.
I'm delighted that you don't consider it any kind of a secondary calling to write the kids.
It takes... You give it equal weight, I guess, in the creative... Absolutely.
I got so far off on that Million Dollar Bear.
I had such a good time with it.
It was...
I swear to God it was being dictated to me.
I mean, I wrote it at night, just every night.
It's a long children's book.
Every night there'd be more there, and it was just there, and it had that kind of feeling, which I always connect to the child level that remains within us, and it's active.
The erudite mind will make sure it's in touch with the child.
Now this book, this new book,
It's certainly not a vanity here, not by anybody here, but it is a novel of the city.
Did you have this in mind, this is a mindful kind of thing, to write a biography of the city as much as you were writing a novel?
Exactly.
Because for me... That's not stretching for me.
I wrote a mystery because I love mysteries.
And for me, one of the greatest mysteries in the world is Manhattan.
It has a quality that comes from the great mass of people who live there.
They constellate a tremendous mental energy.
And this mental energy attracts entities, non-human entities.
They are everywhere.
They're ubiquitous in the city.
They're part of the secret behind the city.
And I like to investigate those aspects.
If I were to try to write a book straight on about that, I'd be dismissed instantly into the wastebasket.
So I let McShane go through his doorways.
I have him listen to the hundred-year-old gate wearing slowly down, because that was how I could get in my chase of the mystery.
of the city because to me there's a spirit behind the city and I went for it.
What went for it?
The spirit of the city or the story?
How did you start this book?
Well, the book started itself ten years ago when I was in the Metropolitan Museum wandering through the Egyptian wing and I saw this unbelievably beautiful box and it had such luminosity.
It was cracked on the side of it, desiccated wood, 2,000 years old, and people played it.
There were the pieces.
Wow!
So I filed it away, and that game board suddenly occurred.
I said, I want to write a mystery.
I want to write about a map.
And a game board is the perfect mystery because it's a labyrinth.
It's an organizational form.
In the Egyptian time, in the Hindu time,
Labyrinth game boards were part of the search for Brahma.
They were part of the search for a spiritual conclusion.
So it's definitely a metaphor for you.
Yeah.
Well, I think the mystery is our life.
The Greeks had a saying, time is a child playing at a game board.
And because they saw games as very serious business.
And McShane...
sees them as serious business, too, because the killer is playing this goddamn game board with him.
And so I then resurrected the Greek mind, the Hindu mind, the Celtic mind, all of whom saw game boards, and the Egyptian mind finally as very serious things.
The Egyptians, when they played that game, it was an oracle for them.
It was their I Ching.
And if you've got somebody, a killer, playing it with you, then I've got what I think humanity has lost,
the seriousness of play.
That's almost an oxymoron, isn't it?
The seriousness of play?
Yeah, but you see, it is for us.
But for them, it was a piece of their liberation.
They were much more interested in liberating powers.
They were connoisseurs of mystery and of the soul, and we are connoisseurs of consumerism.
and we don't know how to play any longer except for big money and big contracts and uh big endorsements and all the rest of it our games are no longer quite what they used to be let me uh you know one thing writing for newspapers is that you do you are able you do hear from people uh the vital signs or response you know i i tell the newspapers somebody calls
plug them through and want to hear from them.
And you'd love to get letters.
You certainly must have an idea of who your reader is.
And I think maybe you think that you're attracting and reaching out to a wider readership with this book?
Well, I want to... And you can go with that question anywhere you want.
Yeah, I think that I'm taking advantage of
a beautiful form and an advantage taking advantage of a signal beautiful form being what the detective form that we all have got sam spade resonating in our minds we are we all are hearing this is the stuff that dreams are made of um he had his maltese falcon and i've got it's funny i was just when i was telling you about the tempest i was about to give you that speech yeah
I wanted to provide the scepter of Pharaoh Akhenaten as my Maltese falcon.
It's the stuff that dreams are made of.
And we're carrying around inside of us this image that Dashiell Hammett, that Raymond Chandler provided for us early on.
We've all got it.
I thought, that is powerful.
The private eye as the archetype, as the carrier of mystery.
and as the there's nothing more spiritual in my mind than a private eye and i know some because all they are are perception they don't create anything they don't make anything all they sell is their perception if their perceptions are on they know who's bugging a corporation if somebody's trying to steal coca-cola cigarettes uh you know formula
And they've got the place bugged, and I know goddamn well they do.
They are hiring private eyes at very high salaries to find out who's planning those bugs.
So it's a game of perception.
Is the gadgetry here legitimate, by the way?
It's all legitimate.
And I know the guy who runs the Pinkerton Risk Assessment.
He's managed it.
And he told me all about this stuff.
And...
You cannot get that Nagra tape recorder that's in that book.
Only an FBI agent can buy this tape recorder from Nagra because it's so sensitive they don't want the mafia to have it.
Or anybody else.
Yeah, right, or anybody else.
And so if you're a well-connected private eye, you can get one.
Or if you're a well-connected policeman.
An ordinary policeman can't get one.
He's got to know, he's got to have to pull with the bureau.
So this is another, this is the private eye for the 90s, because the private eye for the 90s is a college graduate.
He's got a degree in criminal justice.
He's a sophisticated guy.
Even if this degree is in an area that doesn't require philosophy, he becomes very philosophical.
I went out with a private eye in Maine, of all places.
Now, there's no place more paranoid than a convenience store in Maine.
You walk in there a stranger, man, and they really look sideways at you.
Here's a guy, very sophisticated, talking to me about literature and things like that.
He parks, we go inside, and the quicksilver comes right over him.
He's a country guy completely.
And he says, Betty, who drives the school bus, she lives down this way, doesn't she?
He says, oh, no, she lives that way.
We go straight to her house.
Just like that.
And I'm standing there covered in embarrassment.
It's a gift, isn't it?
It's a gift.
It sure is a gift.
And to me, on high top then, there, that's Mercury.
That's Mercury, the winged one, you know, in and out.
You don't even know he's there.
I know a private eye.
In fact, he's in my book.
He's the same way.
He's from Des Moines.
I was thinking, writing a book about this guy.
He visited.
We have a place in the Cape.
And his wife flew in to Boston.
I went to pick him up.
And I looked.
I said, well, we're not here.
I went to take him to the Wiz in the head, and I came out.
And then the guy taps me on the shoulder.
Ray, Ray, Ray, I thought you were playing.
Where have you been?
He says, I've been here all along.
You took a piss, you looked around here.
Where the hell?
You know, I mean, it was really scary.
I mean, the guy, and I'm pretty observant.
I mean, I consider myself kind of a detective as an investigative writer, but this guy absolutely made himself part of the woodwork.
And he observed, and when he felt it was time to come out,
It came out.
It must be endemic to the species.
Yeah, it is.
And the best ones are the masters of this particular discipline.
And, you know, McShane, knowing the scent of women's Perkins, is right on target.
I mean, they develop everything they can because they use it all.
There's actually, I don't have this guy in my book, I might have put him in, but there's actually a British...
Bibliophile, Eric Quayle, who actually argues that he can tell the different books by their smells.
I mean, they can identify certain books.
Charles Lamb, they once asked him, oh, you have all these books.
How can you tell one from the other?
And he said, how does a shepherd know his sheep?
How does a shepherd know his sheep?
That was a great answer.
I'm sorry.
No, no, that's good.
It's a relief.
We do jump around.
Sir, were you on something there that I interrupted?
We were just on the private eye.
Why a private eye?
Okay.
What kind of a compact do you make with your readers?
Well, this is what they call an honest detective novel.
It's already been referred to as that.
The clues are there, and if you follow them closely, you can solve it.
I mean, in terms of when we do time travel and things, as we've seen in the other books, and as you noted at lunch, I mean, you made a statement to me, death was there.
And I believed it, and you certainly must believe it.
How do you persuade a reader to accept some of this philosophy?
Because on some level, he knows it's true.
i don't have to persuade him he is already credible at the same time well that i do have to do i have to make it credible but as far as there's no persuasion necessary i'm counting on that i know that he knows she or she knows on that level that you what i look at are shadows literally this right here i watch my shadow on the street especially in big cities
because it's an extra eye for me.
It tells me things about myself.
The shadow.
Yeah, definitely.
The play of the silhouette is defining my mood in ways that I'll get lost on.
And I keep checking back to my shadow to get this information.
I watch out of both.
I watch peripherally when I'm walking, not worried about getting mugged.
I look this way because
other information comes in on the sides.
And you process it.
Yeah, and you ordinarily, we don't process this way because we're single-focused.
We're taught to have single focus.
So all of my techniques are to break down that single focus, and I put them all in the books to do the same thing for people, to break down their single focus, because I know how narrow it is.
So you really do, you mentioned your techniques, we're talking about literary techniques.
Yeah.
But you derive these techniques from the way you comport your life.
I guess this is training?
Yeah, yeah.
And see, that being there is a Tai Chi master of what they call the Wu Chi form, never moving.
A Tai Chi master can stand like this for a half hour at least, not feel any strain whatsoever.
He learns from the tree how to do that.
I've practiced this myself.
This is a Tai Chi master who's several hundred years old.
T-A-I-C-H-I.
Now, I have tremendous regard for this master standing here before us.
When I'm in a city, I'm always taking account of the rooted masters.
Not as a metaphor.
No direct one-on-one.
And it's so...
it absolves you of all the anxiety now all the worry all the monkey madness now what absolves you the interaction with a rooted master who is several hundred years old are you interacting with this absolutely as we speak yes i've acknowledged the master's presence you do that and you get back immediately you get your is it a verbal acknowledgement it can be and it doesn't it doesn't have to be when
when i need it to be verbal it will be and you feel in your soul that it it acknowledges this acknowledgement from you yes or it accepts it accepted because i i make obeisance i i acknowledge how can you how do you know that it is i know i know that i know i know that my life is enchanted in this way once you live within that enchantment you understand
All else are clear.
I alone am clouded, said Lao Tse.
That's what he meant.
Everybody else knows what's going on.
I alone am clouded because I acknowledge the master.
I mean, think of it just this way, simply.
This tree is ten times older.
Look, it's already several hundred years older than us, and it's going to go, you and I will be in your friend's old manuscript collection, and it's going to still be standing here.
Who's got the jump on who?
And this was probably here during, this is, you know, the common is over there.
This witnessed significant times here.
This was here, wasn't it?
That tree.
I'm sure it was.
Oh, yes.
A noble being.
And I, you see, now you've got my secret.
There it is.
There's nothing any more secret than that.
At what point in your life did you discern this?
I mean, is this something that you worked at?
Like Dolly, I discovered it in childhood and fought to keep it, because others would call it paranoia.
That's part of his brilliance.
He calls his sanity paranoia.
I understood it in childhood in a nonverbal way.
As I grew older and became articulate, I was unable to articulate what these feelings were.
But it was a natural progression.
And it led to the position I hold now.
Tell me at what point you determined that you could take all this and process it into storytelling, and really wonderful storytelling, accessible, engaging storytelling.
When I was four and a half, my grandfather gave me a fire engine.
He was a fireman.
I get into that thing.
And I started pedaling, and I thought, I'm free.
I'm free.
When I was 24, I was mucking around, imitating other riders, paying my dues, but I hadn't gotten the voice yet.
And one day, I suddenly felt myself, I was in my office at my typewriter, and I suddenly felt the fire engine.
I felt my feet on the pedal, and I thought, holy God, I'm in the fire engine again.
And I was in it.
I jumped time, and I was in it, and I thought, he and Nippy, my little dog, and Mr. Bear went down the long alleyway in the sunshine.
The fire bell rang, and a song came out.
This is my first book, a children's book.
And it was a gift from the spirit, I believe.
My grandfather gave me the fire engine.
I was ready to move through the door as a writer, and...
He was then deceased.
I had only his old clock that used to tick in my office.
And I used to put a candle in front of that clock every day and light it for him.
Was it an offering?
Yes.
It was an acknowledgment of an old master.
And he wrapped me in the fire engine and he said, go for it.
and uh i did and i went through that was the beginning and then i had my voice then i knew it's my life it's not the life of juna barn it's not the life of james joyce it's my life and what i've witnessed is now my art you say the voice is there one voice
No, no, no.
These are autonomous.
I was just wondering if these are all part of one voice or are they many voices?
No, the voice that I was describing there was— I understand, but you said something more and I just wanted to clarify that.
Well, no, McShane has got his own voice, Saul Feldman has got his own voice, and I—
These are, you know, Jung would call them autonomous figures in the unconscious.
They are not my ego.
That's the whole idea.
If I were left in my own ego, it wouldn't last very long.
How long could I last in my own ego?
I mean, there's just not enough material there.
And so I started to try and write about a serial killer.
And after about six weeks, the office was filled with energy
man that i did not want any part of because i i'm sensitive to it and i realized what kind of stuff i was pulling in and i don't know where was it coming from it was coming from the the those the world yeah yeah and all the alive dead or alive dead and both and those connoisseurs of that energy those disembodied beings who dig blood sacrifice you know in africa there are some very heavy duty
sacrifice you can read about this it's all around and they get amazing results from blood well the blood in the mind is 10 times more attractive to a certain level of vampire than the blood than you know that's in our veins and you start creating those images and you suck in a lot of weird stuff i don't know if this is true
Maybe this should be off the record, but the guy who runs the San Francisco Review of Books told me that when Anne Rice was writing Interview with a Vampire, her child was dying of leukemia.
Jesus Christ.
Yeah.
I won't put that in, but it's a heck of a... Yeah, isn't it?
I've interviewed Anne Rice before, too.
Do you feel that this is not just entertainment, and this is off the record, then?
Yeah, right.
You feel that it's not just that.
Hell no.
She believes in shit.
No, no, no.
More interestingly, it believes in her.
It has found... I don't mean, it didn't mean classifying as that, using that word.
I know how you feel.
I mean, you're sensitive to good writing, and she can write very well when she wants to.
When she has to.
You've got two full-time secretaries just answer the mail.
Did you know that?
Well, you know, again, that's just proof to me that we are desperate for work of the unknown, about the unknown.
That it would take the form of a vampire just shows how decadent we are and how in need of this kind of thing.
What are you personally willing to believe in and not willing to believe in?
Well, I met a woman in London at the Blavatsky Society, the Theosophical Society, and she said to me, there's only one thing I am able to say.
I know the truth when I see it.
And I've kept that in my mind, and I like to think I know the truth when I see it, that I'm not handing out cheap,
fantasy.
A Reuters news guy said in the other night, it's all fantasy.
He said, every news story I file is a fantasy.
And he said, all the stories we file are fantasies.
The event is one thing, and then what we make about it is this fantasy.
And there are degrees and degrees of this fantasy.
And I like to think that the fantasies I'm shaping are
up the ladder in erudition, in articulation, and that they attract higher energy, and that I'm funneling in stuff that's necessary for connoisseurs of the unknown.
It is said that you have a cult following you, too.
How do you respond to that?
I don't want anybody following me.
I think that if you're a cult novelist, that means you sell a certain amount of copies.
And then when you stop being a cult novelist, you've sold.
And my audience, these people don't buy books, they steal them.
The copies of Fan Man, you never loan it away because you'll never see it again.
I've heard that story so many times.
Have you met Marty Asher?
He's a pretty nice guy.
Yeah, he's a nice guy.
He's got excellent instincts.
And he wrote some funny copy.
His press kit for the Fan Man is funny as hell.
Are you going to tour for that or is this kind of in conjunction with that?
This is in conjunction.
That is, they are riding on the coattails.
That's smart.
Sure, it's smart.
Actually, in my piece, for instance, I'll certainly make mention of Vogue, you know, until you get them both.
You know, I love, of course, being an old newspaper guy, I love the Midnight Examiner.
Yeah.
And, you know, I never realized it was a satire.
Well, yeah, that's right.
And I'm supposed to be a critic, and I said, well, I guess it's a satire.
No, it's not.
It didn't impress me as a sad thing.
No, and you know, the Reuters news guy said to me, I said, have you read Scoop by Evelyn Waugh?
He said, oh yeah, several times.
He said, you know, Waugh wasn't a humorist.
He was a realist.
It's all, Scoop is about newspaper men, and it seems outrageous, but it's not.
My first story for the Midnight Examiner when I worked there was, South American woman gives birth to puppies.
And
We just wrote one story like that after another, and people gobbled it up.
And that's when I realized the power of the printed word.
And I realized how desperate we are for crocodile-headed men and ibis-headed women like the Egyptians had.
They had them.
Their soul was answered by the forms they had on their walls.
We need the forms, but we are again so decadent that the only place we get them are on the front pages of
That fascinates me.
I wonder if you've ever looked at them.
Yale, a couple years ago, published a multi-volume edition of the paintings of Captain Cook's Voyages.
You know, the first, because they didn't have photographs and cameras and stuff, so they took along artists.
And when he did these trips and they saw these animals in Australia and these people in Israel,
what the first impression was.
And you look at some of these, I mean, they really are almost what you think you're seeing, not really what you're seeing.
And I love these first perceptions.
I love the paintings that the first artists did of the American West.
I love those old maps where they, you know, perception and reality, they just... I mean, they're accurate.
I guess.
You know, they're not accurate for our purposes now or to our eye.
But those strange bent Indians, you know, this peculiar way they drew them and the maps, as you say, it was a legitimate perception.
Perceptions always change.
Who's right?
Whose perception is correct?
It's an agreement we have.
We agree on a certain style of perception right now.
And we're lapped inside of it.
You say that you listen to Shakespeare every day?
Every night.
Faithfully.
Never miss.
Is this in lieu of music or is this... No, but I like to go to sleep with the bard because I want him to sink deep inside of me.
I want to get so that those rhythms are just constantly vibrating inside of me.
And when you saturate yourself with it, you're really getting it.
I mean, first of all, you're getting Paul Schofield.
You're getting the best actors of your time.
They add their energy to it, too.
Hearing it is more than reading it, because you're getting written for performance.
And so, to me, I'm trying to reach the Bard.
Let me be honest about it.
I'm reaching out to him.
This is my preparation, my homework.
I have to know it all totally in order to be able to reach out there.
Isn't it extraordinary that we're sitting almost in the exact place where I, ten years ago,
toyed with the idea of writing a novel about bringing Shakespeare back, conjuring him today.
We talked for an hour about things.
And it's lovely.
And it would be in view of those swan boats.
And maybe we would have walked under a, I think maybe we were actually walking to a mulberry tree and you said, where the hell are you going?
Where are you taking me?
You know what I'm saying?
And here we are talking about you're trying to bring him back to
I know when I took a course at Bates in Shakespeare, and this guy is now deceased, but one of the great things he did was to have us at one point in the course, after maybe 15 plays or so, to write 25 lines of blank verse, to take a scene that could have happened, but it's actually off stage.
So you finish it.
You have a minimum of three characters.
The rhythm, all of a sudden, you really are getting this blank verse sense of feeling.
And I'll tell you something that stayed with me for close to 30 years in my own writing.
I mean, you really do have this feeling for rhythms.
And I can pick up a volume of Shakespeare and read it.
I love reading.
I'm impressed enough to see it and to hear it.
But just play with those rhythms.
I absolutely think that it does affect you as a writer at some point.
Oh, yes.
And what I lament is that you can't write that way any longer.
It's too bad, but you can't use those rhythms directly any longer because we don't hear that way.
And beautiful as it is, it can't be reproduced for us.
We cannot reproduce it because we could not...
It couldn't be appreciated.
It just couldn't work.
I'm trying to figure out a way to write a play in poetry, because the sections of Midsummer's Night Dream, the dialogue between Oberon and Titania, I go, I go, look how I go, like the arrow from the something's bow.
I want to write a play that sounds like that.
Can I get a word?
I'd like to think.
Have you written a play?
Yeah, I wrote a play called Joseph of Altoona.
It's about an artist from Manhattan who goes back to Altoona, Pennsylvania to live because he can't stand it any longer and he lives with his mother and she brings in all her friends
They bring in a broken statue of the Madonna and say, do you paint saints?
And ask them to repaint it.
It's the ludicrous position of an artist in a middle-class situation.
I wrote, Django Reinhardt played the blues, and that was staged, there was a reading of that in Manhattan last year.
I've written plays, and I wrote Hair Nightingale as a play, as well as as a book.
But you have to be in...
Manhattan full-time to pull it off.
I don't know how anybody can make a living as a playwright.
You've got to work with a repertory company, and I could do it, and I could be getting stuff put on.
If I moved to L.A., I could be in the movie scene all the time, and I just don't want to.
That was quite a switch, huh, doing a novel from E.T.?
I mean, that's an inversion, isn't it?
Yeah, it is.
I loved it.
Tell me about the challenge of that.
Well, it was great.
First of all, I didn't have to worry about the dialogue and I didn't have to worry about the plot.
That left something open.
It left open E.T.
and everybody else's thought processes.
And what was so much fun is there's a line of dialogue by the mother about how her kids are...
you know, playing Dungeons and Dragons.
And I thought, how does a mother really feel about that?
And I, you know, she feels like an orc.
That's how she feels.
And I was able to put all that humor in and E.T.'
's very sensitive, very far out thought processes.
He's just what I want to be.
I would like to be an extraterrestrial and see I'm working toward it, to come here with total other perception and look at things.
It gave me the opportunity to do one of the things I like to do best.
And I think... You're working towards becoming an extraterrestrial?
Yeah, right.
In other words, becoming non-human, getting rid of all the human model.
Are you actively working?
You bet.
I mean, you talk to trees and have intercourse with your shadow, and you're on the way to being an extraterrestrial.
I always look for the last line of my piece.
I always come to these things looking for my lead and my kicker.
That's great.
He just gave me the last.
So I had a great time with these two.
Would you call it intercourse with your shadow or communion with your shadow?
Well, it's both, really.
I mean, it can be as sensual as intercourse.
My shadow is male, so we better be careful.
But...
That's why I'm asking, giving you a chance to rethink the quote.
Yeah, we better call it communication.
I didn't want to say it quite like that.
I see things in print, by the way.
You know things that people say, you can quote them literally, but they look different.
Have you ever noticed that?
You bet.
When somebody says...
And even if you quote them in context, you say, Jesus, that looks different.
I know I said it, but it looks different from the way I said it.
Have you ever noticed that?
What is that?
Is that something different about the printed word as opposed to the spoken word?
Yeah, they are two different things.
A spoken word is one energy, and a printed word is another.
And that's very distinct.
They're two different muses.
I mean, they're pushed by it.
Somebody was telling me, in fact, a guy that there was actually research done at MIT that, I mean, you write on a word processor, right?
And then do you edit off hard copy or do you edit off the screen?
Because there actually has been research done that you have two different people respond differently to what they read off a page than what they read off a screen.
I know I seem to edit differently off
of hard copy?
Yeah, you do.
So I do both.
I mean, the first... All the... Everything until the last draft is off the screen, and the last draft is on the paper, and then back to the screen.
So you do that.
Back to the screen, yeah.
So you do go to the hard copy, then?
Yeah, but it's primarily on the screen.
But what takes precedence, in your view, in terms of... Because it is going to be read in a book.
Yeah, that's such an interesting question.
I hadn't even thought about it, because the hard copy looks different.
It does, doesn't it, from the screen?
Do you think the book is here forever?
Or do you think that the computer screens are there?
I would lament that.
So would I. So would I. But they've got kids' books now.
The kid can read it in English, press a button, hear it in Spanish.
That is going to make for a wonderfully well-rounded human being.
I'm not going to ask you questions that are answered in so many of those, I guess, certainly which are obvious.
You do swim in the ocean, I guess.
Yeah.
In my wetsuit.
In that ocean.
Yeah.
I need a wetsuit, but last year when I was swimming, I saw this body floating toward me, and it turned out to be a decapitated seal, and I thought,
What takes the heads off seals and killer whales?
Killer whales.
And then I remembered the lobster man told me that he had found decapitated seals on one of the islands washed up and that the killer whales just like to eat the head.
And I thought, how does the whale know the difference between the seal and the novelist?
I know.
Well, the novelists supposedly look the same.
That was one of the things about people on floats, why they're attacked by sharks.
I mean, they really have a profile that is...
Who knows what a white shark thinks?
I'm not going to take up too much of your time, sir.
You've got plenty of good stuff.
Is there anything that you see that does tie the body of your work together?
Is it a corpus?
Or is it just a movable piece?
Is it something that's new all the time, or is there?
You did say that you're striving to be an extraterrestrial, and I wonder if everything you do is a further step along the way to achieving that.
Yes, I would say so.
You would say that?
Yeah, because then that maybe is why all of the books are different, because if I kept repeating, I couldn't make it.
Well, it's an exploration for you as much as it is for the reader.
Is that right?
I'm the extraterrestrial wandering around in this strange landscape.
And each book is another facet of the landscape.
Do you know precisely where you're going?
I mean, these are cliche questions.
The next book I know precisely where I'm going.
It's about a bear who becomes a best-selling novelist and goes on tour.
Watch out for John Irving.
I thought he had a corner on bears.
Yeah, you'll find out.
He did four novels on bears.
It's a true story.
My wife is a novelist.
And we had a house burned down, and all of our manuscripts were lost.
So when we rebuilt our house... Oh, that's rough.
That's rough.
When we rebuilt, we made damn sure that our manuscripts weren't lost.
So she would put hers in a portfolio, an artist's portfolio, and hide it under a spruce tree far from the house every day.
And then we'd go into town to get our laundry and so forth.
We come back one day, and the portfolio is gone.
I go straight over to the old lumberjack, who was our mentor there, and I walk in and he's sitting by the stove, looking into the stove as usual.
His son is sitting there like this.
I walk in and I say, an animal has taken Elizabeth's portfolio.
He just stands up, takes his hat off the hook, puts it on, and walks out the door.
He doesn't even ask what a portfolio is.
So he'd go over there, go under the tree, he sniffs around, he said, a bear's got it.
Elizabeth just collapsed on the ground, and he said, spread out.
That bear could be in the next county, but spread out.
So we spread out down in the woods about 100 yards, and I hear his son calling, what color is that bear, poor fleo?
What color is it?
How many colors are there?
How many of these must be in the main woods, too?
So we go over there.
There are teeth marks on the handle of the portfolio.
There are claw marks on the side of it.
And, you know, he tossed it around to see if there was anything edible in it.
So my novel, Or She, opens up the same way.
The bear... Well, the sex is important.
Yeah.
Certainly in the creative... Yeah, it's a male bear in the story.
He opens it up.
It's not a pie.
It's just termite food.
It's paper.
But he starts to read it.
He said...
This isn't bad.
Is this in the book?
This is in the book, yeah.
And the next scene is him in the office of a New York literary agent.
Is this a children's book?
No, this is an adult book.
And this book is about perception.
And its message is, it doesn't matter who or what you are.
It's the product.
And they...
They just seem, he's a Hemingway-like character.
He's a big, tough guy.
He's a hairy son of a bitch, right.
All right.
Remember, what was Bud Schulberg's line?
I mean, you put a gorilla in a tuxedo, but you can't take him to a ballroom dance.
This is just the opposite of that, isn't it?
Yeah, that's right.
That's right.
And the literary agent says to him,
You know, you really do remind me of Hemingway.
And the bear says, who?
And he says, who indeed?
Yes, of course.
You'll take his place.
Listen, would you inscribe this book?
You bet.
Ed, do you need a pen?
I got a pen.
I'm sure it's a writing.
It's N-I-C-K.
I have a friend who spells it N-I-K.
Oh, or some also do it.
N-I-C, I guess.
That was good.
That again?
Yeah.
It's called The Geography of Nowhere, and it's about how we live in the geography of nowhere.
We used to have neighborhoods, but as soon as they made cars, the Portland Cement Company and the Standard Oil and the rest of them wanted the society to be cars.
And the integration of people, poor people with better...
people with a little more income, ceased.
The rich people live out in the suburbs, the poor people live in the ghettos.
It ghettoized our culture.
You go through suburbia now, there are no sidewalks, there are just roads.
No, it must be his.
No sidewalks and no streetlights.
Which is nice.
You've got little kids.
And we've made a landscape of hell.
It's just amazing.
Look at his tail.
Yeah, he's had a strange little...